Good day,I'm Norman Wildberger. and welcome
to 2012 this being January 1st I've just come
back from coogee beach where I've had a morning
swim and watch the Sun come up I think this year
is going to be a very interesting year for this
series because we are going to move towards a very
big challenge that of tackling the deficiencies
and the downright errors of modern mathematics
modern mathematics doesn't really make logical
sets it does not work as a logical operation it
works on a lot of other levels in terms of papers
presented seminars given conferences attended
students given degrees etc but at the level
of a logical discipline modern mathematics is
very very weak and in fact there are such gaping
holes in it that you could drive trucks through
it now it's very unpopular to say such things
and most people shy away from voicing their
objections the status quo is firmly entrenched
in modern peer mathematics but this year we're
going to try to give it a big push try to move
it try to re oriented towards a more positive
fruitful direction where the logical structure
of the discipline becomes clear with all kinds
of benefits not just for mathematics research but
more importantly for mathematics education ok so
it's a big challenge and we're going to have to
change the tone of this discussion occasionally
I'm going to have to become a little bit more
confrontational I'm going to be honest perhaps
brutally so I don't have to call a spade a spade
and when things don't work I'm going to have to
be very clear about saying that all right
so that's going to happen this year and we
look forward to confrontation controversy but
interesting intellectual developments today's
talk we are going to talk about Laura Polly
numbers which are an interesting extension
of Polly numbers in the direction of decimal
numbers being an extension of ordinary integers
so let's begin by just talking a little bit
about our framework for Polly numbers we started
off with natural Polly numbers and then we had
integral Polly numbers we also have fractional
Paula numbers and then ultimately rational Polly
numbers let me just briefly review the sequence
that we went to to get to the rational Paula
numbers from here to here to here a natural
Polly number was for us a list of natural numbers
like 3 1 4 a little square bracket on top of it
there eventually we represented that in what
we call standard alpha form 3 plus alpha plus
14 alpha squared so the Polly number P is here
represented by this object which looks more like a
traditional polynomial in alpha here's another one
Q equals to 5 which would be 2 plus 5 alpha and
then we move to integral Pauline numbers now the
official definition of a interval Pauline number
is very much like the official definition of an
integer here the integral Paula number is a pair
of natural polly numbers and we generally write
the pair with this sign here less sign p less Q
so for example this polly number 3 114 unless this
polly number to 5 gives us an integral Pauline
umber which effectively we write down as simply
the difference between the various positions so
3 minus 2 is 1 1 minus 5 is minus 4 4 - nothing
is 14 in other words we're effectively dealing
with lists of integers and we write such a thing
with the polynomial notation with alphas 1 - 4
alpha plus 14 alpha squared so that's an integral
poly number so well then when we have integral
poly numbers we can define rational poly numbers
which are essentially sort of quotients or formal
quotients of integral poly numbers officially
it's a pair of integral poly numbers a over B so
there's frags for example one poly number integral
is not a prime number integral the quotient 1 - 4
14 / - 3 - we can also write it in standard Alpha
form this way it's the rational function sometimes
called 1 - 4 alpha plus 49/4 squared over -3 plus
2 alpha so it's an integral polynomial divided by
another integral polynomial as a formal object it
doesn't have to be that this actually is divisible
by this we just treat this combination as a new
mathematical object just like we treated the
combination 3 over 5 as a rational number a new
object built up from natural numbers and integers
all right these rational poly numbers are very
nice framework because the four main operations of
arithmetic are available to us in this framework
so let's have a review of those operations just to
make sure we all understand how the arithmetic of
these rational poly numbers goes so I'm going to
work with the standard Alpha forms here is one
rational poly number here is another and let's
add them adding them is defined the same way you
add rational numbers so what we do is we take the
numerator here times the denominator there and
add this denominator here this numerator here
and divide by the product of the denominators
when we expand this out we get 14 minus alpha
minus 2 alpha squared plus alpha cubed so for
example the 14 comes about because the constant
term is 2 times 1 here and 3 times 4 for a total
of 14 the minus alpha term comes about because
there's 2 alpha here plus 1 alpha here minus 4
alpha here it's a total of minus alpha and so on
so once we've expanded these things out
put them in standard out before then
we have 1 integral poly number divided
by another integral poly number that's
our answer so this poly number plus
this poly number is this poly number
multiplication also exactly the same as
with fractions or rational numbers to
multiply this one by this one we multiply the
numerators and we multiply the denominators
we expand each one of those separately and
piece check that I've done the arithmetic
right there all right so good exercise just
make sure I've done everything correctly so
we end up getting another poly number over
another polar number that's how we multiply
rational poly numbers once we have the primary
operations of addition and multiplication then
the secondary operations of subtraction and
division follow on roughly similar lines so
to take the difference between this one and this
one it's a lot like addition except we take this
times this minus this times this in the numerator
and the denominator is still the product of the
two denominators then you can expand that out
check that I've done the arithmetic right we
get that poly number in the numerator over
that poly number in the denominator that's
the difference of polynomials and finally
the quotient of two polynomials polynomials
so we multiply this over this by alpha squared
over 4 minus alpha to the fifth let me expand that
out and we get that thing there so the rational
paly numbers form a nice arithmetic 'old omein
in which we can add multiply subtract and divide
and where those operations satisfy the same laws
as they do for ordinary rational numbers so this
this kind of domain of arithmetic is called in
mathematics a field there's another very important
point of similarity between rational numbers and
rational paly numbers and that is the notion of
equality both rational numbers and rational paly
numbers have different possible representations
so a given rational number can be described in a
number of different ways for example 2/3 is the
same as 4 6 is the same as 6 9 is the same as
minus 2 over minus 3 so there are many different
representations of the same object so the official
definition I remind you is that the rational
number a over B equals the rational number C
over D precisely when ad equals BC so for example
147 over 252 equals 42 over 72 we can check that
because 147 times 72 equals 252 times 42 you
can compute that you can compute that they both
turned out to be ten thousand five hundred and
eighty-one or and because they're both equal that
tells you that this rational number is the same
as that rational number of course another way of
determining that would have been to reduce both
of them this one here you can see that it has a
common factor of 6 so if we divide top and bottom
by 6 we would get 7 over 12 and with a little bit
more work you could also figure out that this
can be reduced to 7 over 12 but this strategy
of reducing both sides is not the best strategy
in general for example suppose that you wanted
to check that this rational number was the same as
this rational number it's not so trivial to reduce
these fractions you can try it by figuring out
what is a common factor that we can divide both
top and bottom by and then doing the division and
then seeing what additional common factors it has
that's a rather laborious procedure in fact it's
much easier in general to check that this rational
number equals this rational number by taking
this times this computing it and then taking this
times this and computing that and checking that
they're equal that's a little exercise for you to
actually do that to check that these things are
equal this is such an important point I'm gonna
have to emphasize here right that although we have
different representations for a rational number we
have this surefire concrete completely explicit
way of checking whether two representations
are actually the same there's no ambiguity
whatsoever there may be some work involved but
that work involved is finite it's completely clear
straightforward we can tell whether one rational
number is equal or not equal to a second rational
number if we were not able to do that it would be
very cumbersome to do arithmetic arithmetic would
become vague and would become sort of open-ended
because we wouldn't be able to tell whether my
rational number was the same as your rational
number but it's essential for us if we're gonna
have different representations for an object to be
able to tell whether two representations actually
are the same or not that's a very important point
please give that some thought okay so the pleasant
thing about rational paly numbers is that exactly
the same rule defines equality for rational paly
numbers if these are integral poly numbers and
these are integral pauline umbers then this
rational poly number equals this rational pala
number exactly when this equality works between
this product of integral poly numbers I guess
it's that one and this product of integral poly
numbers so for example this rational opponent
number equals this one we can check that because 1
minus alpha squared times 1 is the same as 1 minus
alpha times 1 plus alpha we can compute those
two products and see that they're the same of
course another way of seeing this would be to
recognize that here there is a common factor
the common factor is in fact the denominator one
minus alpha is a factor of that numerator and the
other factor is 1 plus alpha so we can also sort
of divided by the common factor to go from here to
here here's another example 1 minus alpha cubed
over 1 minus alpha is the same as 1 plus alpha
plus alpha squared over 1 the reason is because
this time this equals this times this and you see
I suppose the geometrical series formula occurring
there or to put it another way this one here is
actually divisible by this one and the common
factor if you cancelled it well and you be left
with this one here in the numerator there here's
another example where the common factor business
might be a little bit less obvious okay so here's
a good exercise to give this equality some thought
so these two rational Polly numbers are equal we
both have something of degree 4 over something
degree to hear something - degree 4 here something
of degree 2 here it's not so obvious perhaps to
realize that there are some common factors that
can be cancelled to show that this equals this
straightforward way it's just to take this times
this compute it take this times this compute it
then check that those two integral Polly numbers
are the same if they are we can deduce that these
two are same please have a go and check that to
some exercise so the arithmetic of the rational
numbers and the rational pawn numbers is very
parallel but the rational Pauline numbers are
a much richer arena for doing arithmetic with
ultimately more consequences for mathematics
these two fields are the most important ones in
mathematics field of rational numbers the field
of rational paly numbers a lot of mathematics
ultimately is concerned with the arithmetic
generated by these two fields now most pure
mathematicians will look askance at this statement
and say well no no the the most important fields
are the real numbers and the complex numbers if
you're a graduate student you've probably been
trained on automatic pilot to think of these
as the two most important fields let me say
very clear that K these fields are not very
important because they don't really exist they
are illusions they are fantasy constructions we
can also say that they're jokes they're hoaxes is
played on on by ourselves there are really frauds
the theory of these fields just doesn't work as
it's usually laid out in modern treatments in fact
the modern treatments of these these fields are
very skimpy if you find them at all if you look
in the ordinary calculus text there's usually
some initial discussion about what these these
things are notably that discussion is invariably
missing on any kind of detail there's simply
wishful statements presented that you're supposed
to believe without any supporting evidence even if
you look in more advanced analysis texts you will
see that when they come to trying to say clearly
what these things really are the logical structure
invariably collapses now if you're a graduate
student you probably find yourself skeptical
about that because you know that there's ten
thousands of mathematicians out there who all talk
about real numbers and complex numbers on a daily
basis so you're thinking well how can wild Birger
possibly be right so here's a good little test for
you okay maybe you think that you can simply write
down a good presentation of say what real numbers
are if you have a spare weekend you might try that
okay say oh I'm gonna write it down I'm gonna send
this to Wahlburgers and see what he says see if
he admits that I know how to establish a real
numbers what you have to do you have to write
down exactly what is a real number you have to
write down exactly you have to describe precisely
what the operations on real numbers are you have
to prove the laws of arithmetic that you want to
hold for those operations and to convince us you
should give plenty of illustrative examples so
here's how we multiply real numbers take this
real number you multiply it by this real number
here's how you do it and the answer is this real
number now please circle your answer when you're
finished big red pen circle your answer so we know
it exactly where it is so we can have a good look
at it if you try this humble little exercise you
will find something curious that is not as easy
as you first thought but as you start doing it
you start thinking hmm actually that's a little
bit difficult I wonder how do I actually do that
precisely or I see it that I'm using words here
that I haven't properly defined yet I wonder if
Lyle Berger is gonna require me to define these
words well yes he is okay and then when you
ask yourself well how do I actually define those
things you will find that yo I need a prior theory
of Euclidean geometry or I need a prior theory of
infinite sense do I have such prior theories well
it's up to you do you or you don't well if you
don't then you don't have a proper definition
then you along with your fellow mathematicians are
faking it we're gonna say a lot more about this so
2012 is going to be the year in which we take
down the fraudulent aspect of these supposedly
fundamental frameworks and you are slowly going
to see that everything you can do with real and
complex numbers you can do with rational numbers
and related constructions anything real that you
can do with them anything that's computationally
effective you can do in the rational framework
so a big challenge very contentious don't accept
the status quo unthinkingly okay put your critical
thought caps on all right so let's return to
something less contentious we are now going
to introduce Lorant Pauli numbers which are
analogous to decimal numbers in the rational
number framework so Lorant poly numbers are two
poly numbers the same as decimal numbers are two
regular numbers it's the rough parallel that we're
going to proceed so the definition of a raw poly
number is a rational poly number P which can be
written as a over B where a and B are integral
polity numbers with a denominator B power of alpha
for some n which is a positive number meaning it's
a could be a natural number one two three four
and so on or could also be zero which is to say
that B equals one is included because alpha to the
zero is by definition one soul Arad poly number is
a special kind of rational part number it's one
where the denominator is either one or a power of
alpha so here are some laurent poly numbers one
plus alpha plus alpha squared over alpha cubed
well we can see that it's one integral poly number
divided by another integral poly number and the
denominator is a power of alpha so it is a laurent
poly number okay here have a look at this one now
four plus alpha squared over alpha squared plus
alpha cubed as it stands the denominator is not
a power of alpha but this thing can actually be
rewritten this is also equal to one over alpha
so as long as we can rewrite the polynomial in
another form where there is a denominator which
is a power of alpha then the original is a lot
poly number so the fact that this is equal to one
over alpha means that this is a lot poly number
this is obviously a lot poly number there's an
integral of poly number divided by a power of
alpha here again we can rewrite this because
we can take out the factor of 1 minus alpha here
this is alpha cube times 1 minus alpha and 1 minus
alpha is also a factor of the numerator alright
so you can check that that you can rewrite it I
essentially canceling the factors of 1 minus alpha
and then you do get a power of alpha in the bottom
so this is analogous to what we were doing with
decimal numbers where we allowed something like
two over five five was not a power of ten but that
fraction can be re-written as 4 over 10 once we
rewrite it as 4 over 10 then there is a power of
10 in the bottom and the thing is a decimal number
this is a laurent poly number because one is
considered a power of alpha and this one here
also it's in the category because this factor
here of 1 plus alpha that's down here you can
check that's also a factor of the numerator so
you can rewrite this one to make it in this form
it's a little bit of work there to check a couple
of these examples to see that they're all lorac
poly numbers here are three examples of things
which are not Laurent poly numbers this one isn't
because the denominator is not a power of alpha
and there's no cancellation possible between
here and here so there's no way of making that a
power of alpha here it looks like there's a power
of alpha but it's got to be a pure power of alpha
that 3 is not allowed the denominator has to be a
an integral poly number the numerator has to be
an integral pollen number so integers only and
that 3 is not allowed this thing is not a laurent
poly number because it's not even a poly number
we're only considering ratios or quotients
of poly numbers where the denominator is not
zero that was a condition of being a rational
poly number all right so now let's introduce
the Laurent form for a laurent poly number this is
analogous to the decimal form for a decimal number
so suppose P is a Laurent poly number a over B
so we can write it as some integral poly number
a divided by some power of alpha say alpha to the
K and now we're going to rewrite this we're going
to introduce a new terminology or new notation
we're going to write this as alpha zero times
alpha to the minus K this is simply new notation
that we're introducing plus a 1 times alpha to the
1 minus K we're going to essentially subtract
K from all the exponents of alpha here all the
way through up till the last one which will be a
n alpha to the N minus K so for example here we
have 1 minus 3 alpha plus 4 alpha squared divided
by alpha then we subtract 1 from the powers of
alpha in each of the terms in the numerator here
is alpha to the 0 you subtract 1 we get alpha to
the minus 1 minus 3 plus 4 alpha and now let's
introduce some notation for this Lorant poly
number that extends our original notation for an
ordinary poly number so that was an ordinary poly
number and now we're going to introduce the idea
of the negative powers of alpha being expressed
by additional numbers above the bracket so this
was the coefficient of alpha to the 0 this was
the coefficient of alpha to the 1 alpha squared
alpha cubed and so on if there were more this
is now going to be the coefficient of alpha to
the minus 1 and then above it alpha to the minus
2 and above it alpha to the minus 3 and so on as
another example 2 alpha squared minus alpha cubed
over alpha cubed that's a lower rot poly number
let's subtract 3 from all the exponents 2 alpha
to the minus 1 minus 1 and then we'll write
that in this new notation as to bracket minus
one that's the power of alpha to the zero that's
the power of alpha to the minus one so this is a
lot like decimal notation except that we're not
introducing decimal digits to the right of the
decimal point we're introducing these negative
power coefficients above the bracket it's the
direction that's analogous to to the right of
the decimal point so it's entirely analogous
to what we did with decimal numbers all right
so let's have a look at some more examples here
is a lure rod polly number five minus alpha
to the 7 plus 3 alpha to the eleven all over
alpha to the 9 subtract 9 from the exponents of
the alphas we get five alpha to the minus nine
minus alpha to the minus two plus three alpha
squared and then if we're going to write that
in our standard original form starting with
the highest power there's three alpha squared
there's no alphas there's no ones there's no
alpha inverses there's a minus 1 alpha to the
minus 2 to the minus three - four - five - six
- seven - eight - nine five alpha to the minus 9
alpha plus alpha squared over alpha squared
plus alpha cubed well we can factor the top
and bottom we can cancel the 1 plus alpha we can
even cancel an alpha we just get an alpha to the
minus 1 and the notation for that one is this one
here there's also rather a fundamental basic kind
of new object this is a lot like alpha which was
bracket 0 1 this one is bracket 0 1 like that it's
the inverse of alpha if you multiply alpha times
this one you get 1 now alpha cubed over alpha to
the fifth that's the same as 1 over alpha squared
or then alpha to the minus 2 that's represented
by 0 1 0 notice that we're going to adopt a kind
of a similar convention about placeholder 0 here
as we did for decimal numbers we prefer to write
0.03 rather than just point 0 3 so that that's
0 is sort of telling us that we're we have a
decimal number there similarily we're going
to put at least one number below the bracket so
bracket 0 0 1 that 0 is technically unnecessary
it's just a convention that we're going to put
it there here's another one for example and here
is going the other way if we start with something
in this form and we want to write it as a neuron
politan number in the more standard form we
write it out in terms of powers of alpha it's
now 4 to the minus 2 minus 3 alpha to the minus
1 0 ones and two alphas and then to rewrite that
we would take the highest negative power out
that's an alpha squared and then that would
leave 1 minus 3 alpha plus 2 alpha cubed so make
sure you understand how we go from there to there
now it's pleasant that we can do arithmetic with
these Lorant poly numbers just in their Mirage
form we don't have to convert them back into
the standard 4 for a rational Pauline number
and do the arithmetic there and then convert it
back so let's have an example of that so here's
1 moranto polynomial in Lorant form in other
words written out as powers of alpha including
negative powers of alpha and here's another
one with powers of alpha and negative alpha
so to add those the easy way of doing it is just
to look for like powers and add them separately
so there's an alpha to the minus three here and
here coefficient of minus 3 here coefficient of
five-year add them together a total coefficient
of 2 now 4 to the minus 2's is only one of them
with a minus sign alpha to the minus ones there's
two of them here and one of them here for a total
of three constant things is a four here there's no
constant term so the four is their simple alphas
there's a minus alpha here a three alpha here
for a total of two alpha now that corresponds
to the following computation with more traditional
rational opponent numbers this thing here is just
this rational poly number minus 3 plus 2 alpha
squared plus 4 alpha cubed minus alpha to the
fourth divided by alpha cubed that's the same
as this one and this one here is the same as
this one in this case the denominators are the
same so adding them is relatively simple we just
add this to this to get that and the denominator
stays alpha cubed if we were to convert this to
it's Lorant form we get immediately this so this
computation at the large form level is reflecting
the computation with the rational Pauline numbers
themselves but it's sort of quicker just to add
powers of alpha like powers of alpha and let's
have a look at multiplication so here is product
of two new rod Polly numbers in Lorant form and we
can work just at the level of powers of alpha by
multiplying term by term using the distributive
law and then collecting like powers of alpha so
for example 3 alpha to the minus 2 tons alpha to
the minus 1 that's 3 alpha to the minus 3 alpha
to the minus 1 how do we get that well we get
that with 4 alpha to the minus 1 that there is
four alpha to the minus one while this times this
is -3 alpha to the minus 1 so we have 4 alpha to
the minus 1 minus 3 alpha to the minus 1 for a
total of plus 1 alpha to the minus 1 and please
check that when we expand these things collect
all terms we get this resulting Lorant for for
the laurent poly number now this all corresponds
to this more traditional computation using the
standard form for the rational poly numbers
this one here is really the same as this one
this one here is really the same as this one if
we multiply these in the usual way this times this
just ordinary integral poly numbers multiplied
together we would get this one and the product
of these is alpha cubed and then if we took the
Lorant form of this you can check we would just
get what we got up there and a final comment
all this discussion works equally well for Rho
poly numbers there's nothing special about Lorant
poly numbers just for column poly numbers exactly
the same story for row poly numbers for example
2 plus beta minus beta cubed over beta squared
that's 2 beta to the minus 2 plus beta to the
minus 1 minus beta and as a row poly number we're
going to write this in the following way there's
a power of beta here with a coefficient of minus
1 that's represented by that minus 1 there's zero
constant term there's one beta inverse and there's
two beta to the minus twos so that would be a
standard row poly number now we're sort of adding
decimal versions corresponding to higher powers of
beta but we're admittedly going left rather than
right four decimal numbers and because they're
row objects we enclosed both sides with brackets
to minimize the confusion between where does this
thing stop and another mathematical object begin
when when we're writing things in the long rows
we have to be conscious of the fact that it's easy
to get mixed up in terms of adjacent things
so there's a new convention or an additional
convention for row public numbers that we don't
use for the column poly numbers and here's another
example that you can check here's another poly
number there's it's Lorant form and there's what
it looks like in so the standard original form for
the poly number we've now acquired a fair amount
of experience with the algebra of poly numbers
and their extensions Lorant poly numbers next
time we're going to start flexing our muscles and
apply this framework to discussing the derivative
so it turns out that the derivative has discussed
in most calculus texts doesn't actually require
limits certainly doesn't require real numbers
the derivative is ultimately a purely algebraic
concept and it's best understood as an algebraic
concept so we're going to deduce the derivative
next time in the context of translating poly
numbers this is something that we can do with
polling numbers that we can't do with ordinary
numbers or rather doing it with ordinary numbers
is complete triviality translating poly numbers
is an interesting new development I hope you'll
join me for that I've Norman Wildberger
thanks for listening and Happy New Year